# tenx-rnaseq-pipeline

Scripts for processing files through a non-hashed 10x Genomics scRNA-seq analysis pipeline

<a id="contents"></a>

## Contents

#### [Dependencies](#dependencies)

#### [Metadata Annotation: run_add_tenx_rna_metadata.R](#meta)
- [Parameters](#meta_param)
- [Non-Hashed Guidelines](#non)
  - [SampleSheet](#non_sample_sheet)
  - [Outputs](#non_out)
- [Cell Hashing Guidelines](#hash)
  - [SampleSheet](#hash_sample_sheet)
  - [Outputs](#hash_out)
- [Tests](#meta_test)

<a id="dependencies"></a>

## Dependencies

This repository requires that `pandoc` and `libhdf5-devel` libraries are installed:
```
sudo apt-get install pandoc libhdf5-devel
```

It also depends on the `H5weaver`, `jsonlite`, `rmarkdown`, and `optparse` libraries.

`jsonlite`, `rmarkdown` and `optparse` are available from CRAN, and can be installed in R using:
```
install.packages("jsonlite")
install.packages("rmarkdown")
install.packages("optparse")
```

`H5weaver` is found in the aifimmunology Github repositories. Install with:
```
Sys.setenv(GITHUB_PAT = "[your_PAT_here]")
devtools::install_github("aifimmunology/H5weaver")
```

[Return to Contents](#contents)

<a id="meta"></a>

## Metadata annotation for cellranger results

This repository can add important QC characteristics and cell metadata for non-hashed datasets. It requires the `filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5`, `molecule_info.h5`, and `metrics_summary.csv` files generated by cellranger count as inputs, as well as a `SampleSheet.csv` file (as described below), and generates a decorated output .h5 file and a JSON metrics file based on these parameters and a Well ID.


[Return to Contents](#contents)

<a id="meta_param"></a>

There are 7 parameters for this script:  
- `-i or --in_h5`: The path to the filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5 file from cellranger outs/  
- `-l or --in_mol`: The path to the molecule_info.h5 file from cellranger outs/  
- `-s or --in_sum`: The path to the metrics_summary.csv file from cellranger outs/  
- `-k or --in_key`: The path to SampleSheet.csv  
- `-w or --in_well`: A well name to use for metadata in the format `[XB][0-9]{3}-P[0-9]C[0-9]W[0-9]`  
- `-u or --out_dir`: A directory to use to output the modified .h5 and JSON metrics  
- `-o or --out_html`: A filename to use to output the HTML summary report file  

An example run for a cellranger count result is:
```
Rscript --vanilla \
  tenx-rnaseq-pipeline/run_add_tenx_rna_metadata.R \
  -i /shared/lucasg/pipeline_cellhashing_tests/data/pool16/filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5 \
  -l /shared/lucasg/pipeline_cellhashing_tests/data/pool16/molecule_info.h5 \
  -s /shared/lucasg/pipeline_cellhashing_tests/data/pool16/metrics_summary.h5 \
  -k /shared/lucasg/pipeline_cellhashing_tests/data/pool16/SampleSheet.csv
  -w X000-P1C1W3 \
  -u /shared/lucasg/pipeline_cellhashing_tests/output/pool16/ \
  -o /shared/lucasg/pipeline_cellhashing_tests/output/pool16/X000-P1C1W3_metadata_report.html
```

[Return to Contents](#contents)

## `SampleSheet.csv` formats and output filenames

This script is designed to work with both **Non-Hashed** and **Cell Hashed** input data.

Each should have a slightly different SampleSheet.csv, as described below. The primary difference is that **Non-Hashed** SampleSheets have a WellID column, whereas **Cell Hashed** SampleSheets have a HashTag column. The script will use this difference to detect the type of run.

<a id="non"></a>

<a id="non_sample_sheet"></a>

#### **Non-Hashed** `SampleSheet.csv`

For **Non-Hashed** runs, `SampleSheet.csv` conveys the relationship between SampleID and WellID.

It should have 4 columns: SampleID, BatchID, WellID, and PoolID
```
SampleID,BatchID,WellID,PoolID
PB00042,X051,X051-P1C1W1,X051-P1
PB00043,X051,X051-P1C1W2,X051-P1
PB00044,X051,X051-P1C1W2,X051-P1
```

[Return to Contents](#contents)

<a id="non_out"></a>

#### **Non-Hashed** output files

For **Non-Hashed** outputs, two files will be generated. The .h5 will be named based on PoolID and SampleID, while the JSON metrics for this well will be named based on WellID:  
- .h5 file: [PoolID]_[SampleID].h5, e.g. X051-P1_PB0042.h5
- JSON file: [WellID]_well_metrics.json, e.g. X051-P1C1W1_well_metrics.json

This ensures that the .h5 filename matches the .h5 naming convention that **Cell Hashed** files obtain after the merge step.

<a id="hash"></a>

<a id="hash_sample_sheet"></a>

#### **Cell Hashed** `SampleSheet.csv`

For **Cell Hashed** runs, `SampleSheet.csv` conveys the relationship between SampleID and HashTag.

It should have 4 columns: SampleID, BatchID, HashTag, and PoolID
```
SampleID,BatchID,HashTag,PoolID
PB00042,X051,HT1,X051-P1
PB00043,X051,HT2,X051-P1
PB00044,X051,HT3,X051-P1
```

<a id="hash_out"></a>

#### **Cell Hashed** output files

For **Cell Hashed** outputs, two files will be generated and will be named based on WellID:  
- .h5 file: [WellID].h5, e.g. X000-P1C1W3.h5
- JSON file: [WellID]_well_metrics.json, e.g. X000-P1C1W3_well_metrics.json

Unlike **Non-Hashed** datasets, these .h5 files are still a mixture of all SampleIDs, so filenames will reflect only the WellID at this stage.


[Return to Contents](#contents)

<a id="meta_test"></a>

### Tests

Test runs can be performed using datasets provided with the `H5weaver` package by excluding parameters other than `-o`.

```
Rscript --vanilla \
  tenx-rnaseq-pipeline/run_add_nonhashed_metadata.R \
  -o test_metadata_report.html
```

[Return to Contents](#contents)
